I got really bored so I used da clanker to genreate this mostrocity. Sorry.


                     The .tspec Test Specification Format

Abstract

   This document specifies the .tspec file format, a declarative test
   description language intended for native toolchains and systems
   programming projects.  A .tspec file describes commands to execute,
   arguments, expected process results, and expected filesystem side
   effects.  The format is designed for deterministic interpretation,
   straightforward parsing in resource-constrained environments, and
   binary-safe data handling.

Status of This Memo

   This memo defines an Experimental Protocol for the Internet community.
   This document is a product of the individual contributors.  It does
   not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Discussion and
   suggestions for improvement are requested.  Distribution of this memo
   is unlimited.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Terminology
   3.  Design Goals and Non-Goals
   4.  File Encoding
   5.  Overall Structure
   6.  Primitive Field Types
       6.1.  Integer Field
       6.2.  Blob Field
   7.  Test Sections
   8.  Command Sections
   9.  Command Fields
       9.1.  Execution configuration
             9.1.1.  executable
             9.1.2.  args
             9.1.3.  timeout_ms
       9.2.  Assertions
             9.2.1.  return
             9.2.2.  stdout
             9.2.3.  stderr
             9.2.4.  stdin
             9.2.5.  stdout_contains
             9.2.6.  stderr_contains
   10. Filesystem Validation
       10.1.  File Exists
       10.2.  File Exists with Exact Content
       10.3.  File Missing
   11. Examples
       11.1.  Successful Compilation and Execution
       11.2.  Expected Compilation Failure
   12. Parsing Requirements
   13. Extensibility and Forward Compatibility

1.  Introduction

   The .tspec format provides a declarative mechanism for specifying
   test cases that involve process execution and filesystem state
   verification.  It is targeted at testing compilers, command-line
   tools, system libraries, and build pipelines.  A .tspec file contains
   one or more test sections, each composed of a sequence of command
   sections and optional filesystem checks.  The format intentionally
   avoids control flow, variables, and scripting constructs; all
   behaviour is expressed as fixed expectations.

   This document defines the syntax and semantics of .tspec version 1.
   Parsers implementing this specification MUST interpret .tspec files as
   described herein.  Future versions may extend the format in a
   backward-compatible manner.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Test:  A named, ordered collection of commands and filesystem checks.

   Command:  A single process invocation with associated expectations.

   Field:  A key-value pair within a section that conveys typed data
      (integer or blob).

   Test runner:  The program that parses a .tspec file, executes the
      described commands, and validates results.

3.  Design Goals and Non-Goals

   The .tspec format is designed to meet the following goals:

   o  Deterministic execution: given the same input files, a .tspec file
      must yield the same pass/fail outcome.

   o  Simple parser implementation: the grammar is regular enough to be
      parsed with straightforward line-oriented code, suitable for C
      language implementations.

   o  Binary-safe fields: arbitrary byte sequences can be embedded
      without escape sequences, using explicit size prefixes.

   o  Append-only extensibility: new field types or section types can be
      introduced without breaking existing parsers.

   The format explicitly does NOT support:

   o  Conditionals, loops, or variables.

   o  Shell syntax, command substitution, or piping.

   o  Regular expressions in matching.

   o  Nested data structures.

   o  Embedded scripts or dynamic evaluation.

4.  File Encoding

   A .tspec file is a binary-safe structured file format.
   Control directives are textual. Blob content may contain
   arbitrary bytes. Control lines (those beginning with a colon,
   see Section 5) MUST consist of ASCII characters.  The content
   portions of blob fields may contain arbitrary bytes,
   including NUL (0x00).

   Lines MUST be terminated by a single line feed character (U+000A,
   "\n").  Carriage return (U+000D) is not part of the line ending.
   Implementations SHOULD reject files containing carriage returns in
   control lines.

   All text outside of blob content SHOULD be encoded in UTF-8, but
   parsers are not required to validate character encoding except for
   control line structure.

5.  Overall Structure

   A .tspec file is a sequence of top-level sections.  The only top-level
   section defined in this specification is the test section, delimited
   by the tokens ":test". Within a test section, commands are introduced
   by ":command" directives. Filesystem validation directives following a
   command apply to that command until another ":command", ":test", or EOF
   is encountered. Blank lines MAY appear anywhere and MUST be ignored.
   Parsers MUST ignore horizontal whitespace preceding the ":" character
   of a control directive.

   The hierarchical structure can be represented as:

   :test <name>
       :command <name>
           fields...
       filesystem checks...

       :command <name>
           fields...
       filesystem checks...

    :test <name>
       ...

6.  Primitive Field Types

   A field consists of a type tag, a name, and a value.

6.1.  Integer Field

   An integer field is encoded as:

   :int <name> <value>

   where <value> is an optional minus sign followed by one or more
   decimal digits (0-9).  The integer is interpreted as a signed decimal
   number in base 10.  Leading zeros are permitted but not significant.
   The field occupies a single line; no additional content follows.

   Example:

   :int return 0

6.2.  Blob Field

   A blob field spans two lines:

   :blob <name> <size>
   <content>

   <size> is a non-negative decimal integer indicating the number of bytes
   that follow.  Immediately after the newline terminating the first
   line, exactly <size> bytes of content are read.  The content MUST be
   followed by a newline character (U+000A), which is not included in
   the size.

   Example:

   :blob executable 3
   gcc

7.  Test Sections

   A test section begins with the line:

   :test <name>

   where <name> is a sequence of non-space ASCII characters.
   The section ends with the next :test token or with EOF.

   The remainder of the line after the directive forms the name.

   A test section contains one or more command sections and their
   associated filesystem checks.  The commands are executed in the
   order they appear.  If any command fails validation, the test MUST
   be marked as failed, and subsequent commands within the same test
   section MUST NOT be executed.

8.  Command Sections

   A command section describes the execution of a single external
   process.  It begins with the line:

   :command <name>

   where <name> is a sequence of non-space ASCII characters. The section
   ends with the next :command token, :test token or with EOF.

   The remainder of the line after the directive forms the name.

   Within the command section, a set of fields define the process
   invocation and expected results. If multiple executable fields appear,
   behavior is implementation-defined, with the last occurrence RECOMMENDED
   to take precedence. Other fields are optional. The order of fields
   within a command section is not significant.

9.  Command Fields

   The following fields are defined for command sections.  A parser
   encountering an unknown field tag in a command section MUST reject
   the field.

9.1  Execution configuration

   The fields in this subsection describe the program to execute and
   the environment in which it runs.  Collectively they form the
   execution profile for a command. A command section SHOULD contain
   exactly one executable field. If multiple executable fields appear,
   the last one takes precedence.

9.1.1.  executable

   Type:  blob

   The path or name of the program to execute. Relative or bare
   executable names MAY be resolved using the host operating system's
   search path. If executable is not found, the command fails.

   Example:

   :blob executable 3
   gcc

9.1.2.  args

   Type:  blob

   Raw command-line arguments passed to the executable.  The content is
   a single string containing the arguments exactly as they should be
   provided.  The args field is tokenized according to the .tspec
   argument splitting rules defined below.

   The args field is tokenized by the test runner into an argument
   vector prior to process execution.  Arguments are separated by one
   or more ASCII space characters (U+0020).  A double quote character
   (U+0022) begins and ends a quoted argument; spaces enclosed within
   quotes are preserved and do not terminate the argument.  A literal
   double quote inside a quoted argument is represented by two
   consecutive double quote characters.  No other escape sequences are
   defined.  The resulting argument vector MUST be passed directly to
   the operating system process execution API without invoking a shell.

   Example:

   :blob args 28
   gcc -o test.exe -Wall test.c

   :blob args 27
   ./test.exe "Hello world" -v

9.1.3.  timeout_ms

   Type:  integer

   The maximum wall-clock time, in miliseconds, that the process is allowed
   to run. If the process does not terminate within this duration, the
   test runner MUST attempt to terminate the process and MUST mark the
   command as failed. If not specified, no time limit is imposed.

   Example:

   :int timeout_ms 5

9.2. Assertions

   Assertion fields define the expected results of a command.
   Multiple assertions of the same type (e.g., several
   "stdout_contains" fields) MAY appear within a single command
   section.  Each assertion MUST be evaluated independently; if any
   assertion fails, the command fails.  The order in which assertions
   are declared SHOULD be preserved by the parser for diagnostic
   output, but the pass/fail outcome does not depend on ordering.

9.2.1.  return

   Type:  integer

   The expected process exit code.  If omitted, no exit code validation
   is performed.

   Example:

   :int return 0

9.2.2.  stdout

   Type:  blob

   If present, the entire standard output of the process MUST be
   compared byte-for-byte with the given content.  Any mismatch
   constitutes a command failure.

   Example:

   :blob stdout 12
   hello world

9.2.3.  stderr

   Type:  blob

   Equivalent to stdout but for the standard error stream.

9.2.4.  stdin

   Type:  blob

   This field is reserved for future versions and is NOT RECOMMENDED
   to use. Implementation SHOULD reject it until stdin is not defined.

9.2.5.  stdout_contains

   Type:  blob

   The provided byte sequence is searched for as a substring within the
   process's standard output.  The match is raw, case-sensitive, and
   does not use regular expressions.  If the substring is not found,
   the command fails.

   Example:

   :blob stdout_contains 7
   success

9.2.6.  stderr_contains

   Type:  blob

   Equivalent to stdout_contains but applied to standard error.

10.  Filesystem Validation

   Filesystem checks are placed after a command section, before the
   next command section or the end of the enclosing test section.  They
   verify side effects left by the preceding command.  If any check
   fails, the test is marked as failed and further commands are not
   executed.

10.1.  File Exists

   The ":file" directive asserts that a file or directory exists at a
   given path.  Syntax:

   :file <path-length> <path>

   <path-length> is a decimal integer specifying the number of bytes
   that form the path.  The path bytes follow a single space (U+0020)
   and occupy exactly that many bytes; the line ends with a newline.
   The test runner MUST verify that a filesystem entry exists at
   <path>.  If no entry exists, the check fails.

   Example:

   :file 15 logs/output.log

10.2.  File Exists with Exact Content

   The ":file_contains" directive asserts that a file exists and that
   its entire content matches a given byte sequence exactly.  Syntax:

   :file_contains <path-length> <path> <content-size>
   <content>

   The line begins with the token ":file_contains", followed by
   <path-length> (decimal byte count of the path), a space, the path
   bytes, a space, and <content-size> (decimal byte count of the
   expected content).  After the newline, exactly <content-size>
   bytes of expected content follow, then a final newline.  The test
   runner MUST confirm that the file at <path> exists, that its size
   equals <content-size>, and that its bytes match the provided
   content byte‑for‑byte.  Any mismatch fails the check.

   Example:

   :file_contains 13 logs/test.log 11
   hello world

10.3.  File Missing

   The ":file_missing" directive asserts that no filesystem entry
   exists at the given path.  Syntax:

   :file_missing <path-length> <path>

   <path-length> is the decimal byte count of the path; the path
   bytes follow a single space.  If any file, directory, or other
   entry exists at <path>, the check fails.

   Example:

   :file_missing 8 temp.txt

11.  Examples

   This section provides complete, non-normative examples.

11.1.  Successful Compilation and Execution

   :test pedantic_enabled

   :command compile

   :blob executable 3
   gcc

   :blob args 52
   test.c -pedantic -DLOGCIE_PEDANTIC -o test.exe

   :int return 0

   :command run

   :blob executable 10
   ./test.exe

   :int return 0

   :blob stdout_contains 7
   success

   :file_contains 13 logs/test.log 11
   hello world

11.2.  Expected Compilation Failure

   :test pedantic_disabled

   :command compile

   :blob executable 3
   gcc

   :blob args 21
   test.c -o test.exe

   :int return 1

   :blob stderr_contains 24
   LOGCIE_INFO_VA undefined

12.  Parsing Requirements

   A conforming parser MUST process a .tspec file according to the
   following rules:

   o  Lines beginning with a colon (':') that are not recognised as
      valid directives defined by this specification MUST cause a
      parse error unless the parser is explicitly configured to allow
      unknown directives.

   o  Binary content sizes MUST be honoured exactly; reading fewer or
      more bytes than declared is an error.

   o  A parser SHOULD preserve binary content without modification,
      including NUL bytes and non-UTF-8 sequences, when used for
      matching.

   o  The order of commands within a test section is significant and
      MUST be preserved.  The order of fields inside a command section
      is not significant.

13.  Extensibility and Forward Compatibility

     Future extensions MAY introduce new directives and field types.
     Parsers compliant with an earlier revision of this specification
     MUST reject unknown directives unless explicitly configured otherwise.

Appendix A.  Runner Conventions (Non-Normative)

   This appendix describes conventions used by the reference test runner
   ("tspec"/"test") for organizing and discovering .tspec files, and for
   isolating the side effects tests produce. Nothing here is part of the
   .tspec wire format itself; it is tooling policy layered on top of it,
   and other implementations are free to organize test suites differently.

A.1.  Test Discovery

   Given a directory, the runner recursively finds every file matching
   "*.tspec" and treats each as an independent unit of work. Directory
   entries beginning with "." (including the runner's own scratch
   directory, see A.2) are never descended into.

   By convention, each logical test case lives in its own directory
   alongside any source files, fixtures, or other inputs it needs. A
   single directory MAY contain more than one .tspec file; each is
   discovered and run independently. Files or directories are discovered
   in a deterministic (sorted) order, so repeated runs over an unchanged
   tree produce results in the same order.

A.2.  Side-Effect Isolation

   Before executing a .tspec file, the runner recursively deletes and
   recreates a directory named ".side_effects" inside that file's own
   directory (the same directory execution is chdir'd into per Section 5
   of this specification). This gives every run of every test a clean,
   empty scratch space, so tests are repeatable and do not accumulate
   stray artifacts across runs or leave build output sitting in version
   control.

   The runner only owns the lifecycle of this directory (create, wipe,
   recreate); it does not inspect or rewrite paths inside .tspec files.
   Test authors are expected to direct any file a command creates,
   compiles, or touches into ".side_effects/" explicitly, e.g.:

     :blob args 40
     main.c -o .side_effects/main -I../..

     :file 21 .side_effects/main.log

   ".side_effects" SHOULD be excluded from version control (e.g. via
   .gitignore).

A.3.  Outcome Semantics Across a Suite

   Per Section 7, a failing command aborts only the remaining commands of
   its own test section; the runner continues on to subsequent :test
   sections in the same file, and to subsequent files when running a
   whole directory. Results are aggregated across the full run: total
   tests executed, tests passed, and tests failed. A .tspec file that
   fails to parse (a genuine format error, as opposed to a failed
   assertion) aborts only that file; other discovered files still run.
   This is what makes it meaningful to point the runner at a whole tree
   of test directories and get back a single pass/fail count.

A.4.  A Note on Captured Output

   stdout/stderr captured from an executed command is held in a
   fixed-size buffer (see Section 3, "simple parser implementation" and
   binary-safety goals). If a command produces more output than that
   buffer holds, only the earliest bytes are retained and the rest is
   discarded. stdout_contains / stderr_contains / stdout / stderr
A.5.  Concurrency Readiness

   The reference runner currently processes discovered files one at a
   time. Its internals are nonetheless structured so that running each
   file on its own thread later is a small change rather than a rewrite:

   o  Nothing in the run path mutates process-wide state. In particular,
      the runner never calls chdir() on itself -- the current working
      directory is shared by every thread in a process, so doing so
      would make concurrent file processing race on it. Instead, each
      file's directory is resolved once (via realpath) into a plain
      string ("base_dir") that is passed explicitly to whatever needs
      it: it is chdir()'d into inside a freshly-forked *child* process
      right before that child execs a command (safe -- a child's chdir
      affects only itself), and it is prepended to any path the runner
      checks directly (:file, :file_missing, :file_contains, and the
      .side_effects directory of A.2).

   o  Running one file never depends on another. Opening, scanning, and
      streaming a .tspec file, and accumulating that file's own pass/
      fail counts, all happen through call-local variables passed by
      pointer -- there is no shared mutable structure a second file's
      processing could interfere with.

   o  Suite-wide totals are accumulated by summing each file's own
      independently-computed result after the fact, not by having every
      file increment one shared counter as it goes. A future thread pool
      can therefore let each worker return its own tally and have only
      the (trivially lockable, or lock-free via joining) final summation
      touch shared state.
